# 2. Gitting started

## Lesson Objectives
In this lesson, we will:
- verify our GitHub accounts
- verify our install of Git
- configure Git on our computers

## Commands to be Covered
- `git --version` -- Ask Git what version it is. Also useful for verifying that you have Git installed.
- `git config --global <configuration option> "configuration value"` -- Change your global Git configuration file to add or set a configuration option value. Git uses this file to determine who you are, communicate with GitHub (or other Git resources), and remember your settings for using Git.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
## Make sure you have a GitHub account and can log into it!
If you have not yet created a GitHub account, please do so now! [github.com](https://github.com)

Pay attention to your *user email* for GitHub. You will need it later :grin:

It is recommended that you *use your UA email*, but it is not necessary.

## Make sure you have Git installed on your computer!
To check if you have (the right version of) git installed, open a command line and do:

```bash
git --version
```

You should get an output like this (Any 2.XX.X version should be fine):

```text
git version 2.23.0
```

If you get the following error message...

```text
bash: git: command not found
```

...you need to install git! [Visit the workshop homepage here to find the git installation instructions](https://ua-carpentries-workshops.github.io/2019-10-26-Tucson/).

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
## "Configure" Git on your computer
Git works by creating special identifiers for changes that you make to files. These identifiers are generated in part based on the author of the changes (among many other things).

Consequently, Git needs to know who you are! Let's introduce ourselves to Git:

```bash
git config --global user.name "YOUR NAME HERE"
git config --global user.email "YOUR GITHUB EMAIL HERE"
```

Now we are ready to use Git!

# Guides and Resources

[First Time Git Setup Guide](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-First-Time-Git-Setup)
