# 3. Repositories

## Lesson Objectives
In this lesson we will cover:
- what is a repository?
- local vs. remote repositories

## Terminology to be Covered
- **repository** -- what we call the thing that tracks changes to our files. You might think of it like a database, an invoice, or a receipt of every change you have ever saved.
- **repo** -- short for repository.
- **local repository** -- a repository that you have on your *local machine* (e.g., your laptop).
- **remote repository** -- a repository that lives elsewhere, typically online (i.e., it lives "remotely").

## Repositories
Git uses some special terminology that can be confusing for first-timers. First up is the term **repository**. "Repository" is the term used to refer to a directory (folder) that holds content that Git can keep track of.

*Conceptually*, a repository is like a database or a digital warehouse. Are you working on a set of files that you want to keep track of using Git? You'll have to put them in a Git repository!

*Technically*, a Git repository is any directory that contains a special `.git/` directory inside of it. That `.git/` directory is what handles the operations of Git. It is those Git operations that make the directory function as a repository (by tracking changes) instead of a normal directory (which tracks nothing).

Repositories are often referred to by a shorthand term, **repo**. There is no difference between these terms (other than 6 letters).

### Local vs. Remote Repositories
There are two "kinds" of repository, **local** repositories and **remote** repositories. The technical difference is nuanced, so I'm instead going to tell you how we will use the terms:

- **Local repository** -- any repository on somebody's *local machine* (e.g., personal laptop, laboratory workstation).
- **Remote repository** -- any repository on *GitHub* or a similar online platform.

You can use Git on either a local or a remote repository - it is not necessary to have both. Usually, however, you use both one or more local repositories and a remote repository *linked together*. We will talk more about this later, when we turn to remote repositories. For now, we will learn the basics of git using *local repositories only*.
