# 4. Gitting things done

## Lesson Objectives
In this lesson, we will learn about:
- git repositories
- local vs. remote repositories
- creating a local repository
- how to organize and track your changes with git

## Terminology Covered
- **to commit (v.)** -- to save the state of all of your files in the repository.
  - _I committed the changes to the repository._
- **commit (n.)** -- an individual instance of a committing event. A snapshot of the repository in time.
  - _The last commit introduced a bug in the program._
- **changeset** -- a set of changes which should be treated as an indivisible group.
- **index** -- this is a list of all commits.
- **to stage (v.)** -- to bundle files together *in preparation* of a commit (i.e., saving the state to the repo).
- **staging area (n.)** -- the digital "space" where staging takes place. Changes must first be added to the staging area before you can commit them.

## Commands Covered
- `git init` -- Start a Git repository
- `git status` -- Check the status of this repository (has anything changed?)
- `git diff` -- See the differences noted by `git status`
- `git add` -- Stage files whose changes you want to track
- `git commit --message "YOUR COMMIT MESSAGE"` -- Commit the changes to the Git repository with a descriptive message
- `git log` -- See a log of committed changes to the repository

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
## Initializing a local Git Repository
Congratulations, you are about to start actually using Git!

Remember, a local Git repository is just a directory that you tell Git to keep track of.
So let's make a fresh directory to get started:

```bash
cd ~/Desktop
mkdir git-lesson
```

Let's convert that directory into a Git repository:

```bash
cd git-lesson
git init
```

And voilà! We have a Git repository!

### How do I know it worked?
Remember, Git repositories are just directories that contain a special `.git` directory inside them.
To see that this is the case, let's list **ALL** the contents of the `git-lesson` directory.

```bash
ls -a
```

You should see this:

```text
. ..  .git
```

Good. You have just created a local repository!

### Do I have to start from a new directory?
Suppose you have a project you've been working on and you want to start tracking it with Git.

Of course you *could* make a new directory, initialize it as a Git repository with `git init`, and then move all your files from their current location into the newly minted Git repository. But who wants to do all that?

In actuality, you can convert any directory into a Git repository. All you need to do is:
1. Move into the directory
2. `git init`

### Do I have to do `git init` from inside the directory?
Nope! You can specify a directory after the `git init` command. If that directory exists, it is initialized as a Git repository. If it does not exist, a new directory is created and then converted to a Git repo.

```bash
git init ~/Desktop/git-lesson2
```

Cool, huh? We don't need both of these repos though, so let's get rid of that last one:

```bash
rm -r ~/Desktop/git-lesson2
```

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
## A (local) Git-based Work Cycle
Ok, so we have a Git repository. Now...how do we use it?

We'll go through this step-by-step shortly, but let's preview a good work cycle to use with Git:
1. Do some work. It's a good idea to work on small, easily describable chunks.
2. `git status`: ask Git to give you a status report to assess the changes you made.
3. `git add <file>`: add changes that you want to keep to the *staging area*.
4. `git status` (again): it's a really good idea to verify that Git thinks you added the same changes that you think you added.
5. `git commit --message "YOUR MESSAGE"`: commit the changes to the repository. This will create a commit that contains your message, which will be logged in the history of your repository forever :grin:
6. Rinse and repeat as desired.

We will expand on this recommended work cycle a little bit in the next lesson. But for now, let's put it into practice!

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
## Working with Git
Let's start by adding a file to our repo:

```bash
touch readme.txt
ls
```

Ok, that worked like normal. We have a new file in the directory. What does Git think happened?

```bash
git status
```

Let's break down what Git is telling us, bit-by-bit:

```text
On branch master
```

Ok...what is a branch, and why is it called "master"?

In many cases, Git uses a tree analogy for terminology. You don't need to worry about this for now. Just know that "branching" is a powerful feature of Git. But remember, we are only using a hammer in this lesson, not the complicated swiss-army-hammer that is all of Git!

```text
No commits yet
```

Ok...what's a commit?

A commit is a snapshot of the repository in time. As you make changes, you may decide to keep them or you may decide to throw them away. Changes that you want to keep are changes that you are *committed* to, thus Git refers to them as "commits".

```text
Untracked files:
  (use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be committed)
    readme.txt

nothing added to commit but untracked files present (use "git add" to track)
```

Ok, now this is the meat of the `git status` report. Git's job is to track files, right? Here it's telling us that there are files in the repository that it is not tracking. It even tells us how to start tracking something or include it in a commit.

So why is our new file "untracked" even though Git's job is to track files, and Git sees that the file is there?

This is where **staging** comes in. In order to allow you to organize the changes you make in sensible chunks, Git adds an intermediate step between making a change and committing it. This allows you to, e.g., make many changes to different files, and then *commit only some of those changes to the repository*. The set of changes that you commit is called a **changeset**. The **staging area** is the place where those changes "go" to create that changeset in preparation for a commit.

[INCLUDE IMAGE OF WORKING COPY, STAGING AREA, LOCAL REPOSITORY HERE]

We want to commit our new readme file to our repository. So let's take Git's advice:

```bash
git add readme.txt
```

Let's see how this changed our `git status` report for the repository.

```bash
git status
```

Notice this part:

```text
Changes to be committed:
  (use "git rm --cached <file>..." to unstage)
	new file:   readme.txt
```

Now that we have *added readme.txt to the staging area*, Git tells us we have `changes to be committed` that includes a `new file: readme.txt`.

Git is even helpful enough to tell us how to remove this change from the staging area if we don't want to commit it.

Ok, I think we are ready to make our first commit. Here's how:

```bash
git commit --message "initial commit adding readme"
```

Let's see if the status of our repo is different now:

```bash
git status
```

We should see the following:

```text
On branch master
nothing to commit, working tree clean
```

Again, another tree analogy. Basically, Git is saying "your working copy of the repository matches the official current state of the repository".

Congratulations, you've worked through your first Git-based work cycle!

## Exercise: DIY Git!
Using the same repo we were just working on, I want you to:
1. Add some text into readme.txt
2. Add a new file to the repo called `practice.txt`
3. Make a separate commit for each of these two changes

## Congratulations, you now know how to use Git in a local repository!

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# Guides and Resources
